Blog: exponential histograms (#2661)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2023/exponential-histograms.md

---
title: Exponential Histograms
date: 2023-05-22
author: '[Daniel Dyla](https://github.com/dyladan)'
spelling: cSpell:ignore Dyla quantiles subsetting Ruslan Vovalov Ganesh Vernekar
canonical_url: https://dyladan.me/histograms/2023/05/04/exponential-histograms/
---

> Previously, in [Why Histograms?][] and [Histograms vs Summaries][], I have gone
> over the basics of histograms and summaries and the tradeoffs, benefits, and
> limitations of each of them. Because they're easy to understand and demonstrate,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, in [Why Histograms?][] and [Histograms vs Summaries][], I went
over the basics of histograms and summaries, explaining the tradeoffs, benefits, and
limitations of each. Because they're easy to understand and demonstrate,
```

those posts focused on so-called explicit bucket histograms. The exponential
bucket histogram, also referred to as native histogram in Prometheus, is a
low-cost, efficient alternative to explicit bucket histograms. In this post, I

> will go through what they are, how they work, and the problems they solve that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
go through what they are, how they work, and the problems they solve that
```

explicit bucket histograms struggle with.

> # Types of histograms

Reviewer: Remember that headings start at level 2 in our docs and blog pages. Please make the update here and for all other headings in this post.

```suggestion
## Types of histograms
```

For the purposes of this blog post, there are two major types of histograms:
explicit bucket histograms and exponential bucket histograms. In previous posts,
I've focused on what OpenTelemetry calls explicit bucket histograms and
Prometheus simply refers to as histograms. As the name implies, an explicit
bucket histogram has each bucket configured explicitly by either the user or
some default list of buckets. Exponential histograms work by calculating bucket
boundaries using an exponential growth function. This means each consecutive
bucket is larger than the previous bucket and ensures a constant relative error
for every bucket.

## Exponential histograms

In OpenTelemetry exponential histograms, buckets are calculated automatically
from an integer _scale factor_, with larger scale factors offering smaller
buckets and greater precision. It is important to select a scale factor that is

> appropriate for the scale of values you are collecting in order to minimize

Reviewer 2: maybe "distribution of values" instead of "scale of values"?

histograms called _perfect subsetting_.

## Perfect subsetting

In the chart above, some of the bucket boundaries are shared between histograms
with differing scale factors. In fact, each time the scale factor increases by
1, exactly 1 boundary is inserted between each existing boundary. This feature
is called perfect subsetting because each set of boundaries for a given scale
factor is a perfect subset of the boundaries for any histogram with a greater
scale factor.

Because of this, histograms with differing scale factors can be normalized to
whichever has the lesser scale factor by combining neighboring buckets. This
means that histograms with different scale factors can still be combined into a
single histogram with exactly the precision of the least precise histogram being
combined. For example, histogram _A_ with scale 3 and histogram _B_ with scale 2
can be combined into a single histogram _C_ with scale 2 by first summing each
pair of neighboring buckets in _A_ to form histogram _A'_ with scale 2. Then,
each bucket in _A'_ is summed with the corresponding bucket of the same index in
_B_ to make _C_.

## Error rate

> The error rate of a histogram is defined as the average relative error when

Reviewer 2: The error of a histogram is defined as the maximum relative error when...

Author: Isn't it possible to have an absolute error of the entire bucket width?

If a bucket goes from 1 to 2, and you have 100 values of 1.0001, using linear interpolation to select the 99th point in the bucket would result in 1.99 when the actual value is 1.0001. All of the calculations used in the OTEP and spec use the bucket midpoint for the error calculation. To me, that indicates it is the average or expected relative error, but not the maximum.

estimating the value of a particular-ranked data point. This is important
because it is how φ-quantiles are estimated. In a histogram with x data points,

> the nth percentile is the data point at rank `n / 100 * x`. For an example of

Reviewer 2: n-th

this calculation, see my previous post [Histograms vs Summaries][]. When

> estimating ɸ-quantiles it is very important to know the expected relative error

Reviewer 2: I think you can drop mentioning the expected relative error here. More important is the maximum relative error, for which the calculation is shown below.

> rates and maximum relative error rates so that you can effectively monitor your

Reviewer 2: I would always write  "relative error" instead of "relative error rate"

SLOs.

> When using linear interpolation, the expected relative error is half the bucket

Reviewer 2: The relative error is minimized, if the harmonic mean of the bucket boundaries is used for estimation.
For bucket with index `i`, the lower and upper boundaries are given by `l = base^i` and `u = base^(i + 1)`, respectively. The estimated value `x` given by the harmonic mean would be
```
x = 2*l*u / (l + u)
  = (2 * base^i * base^(i + 1)) / (base^i + base^(i + 1))
  = 2*base^(i+1) / (1 + base)
```
The worst case estimation error appears, if the original value was either close to the lower boundary `l` or the upper boundary `u`. We can calculate the relative error for both cases:
```
(x - l) / l = x/l -1 = (2*base) / (1 + base) - 1 = (base - 1) / (base + 1)
(u - x) / u = 1 - x/u = 1 - 2 / (1 + base) = (base - 1) / (base + 1)
```
Since the relative error is the same in both extreme cases, `(base - 1) / (base + 1)` also defines the maximum relative estimation error. For `scale = 3` with corresponding `base  = 1.090508` (see base calculation above) the maximum relative error would be 
```
(1.090508 - 1) / (1.090508 + 1) = 0.04329 = 4.329%
```

width divided by the bucket midpoint. Because the relative error is the same
across all buckets, we can use the first bucket with the upper bound of the base
to make the math easy. An example is shown below using a scale of 3.

```
scale = 3

> # see above for base calculation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For base calculation, see above
```

zero. All of the math and explanation above applies in the same way to negative
values, but they should be substituted for their absolute values, and upper
bounds for buckets are lower bounds (or upper absolute value bounds). Zero
values, or values with an absolute value less than a configurable threshold, go
into a special zero bucket. When merging histograms with differing zero
thresholds, the larger threshold is taken and any buckets with absolute value
upper bounds within the zero threshold are added to the zero bucket and
discarded.

# OpenTelemetry and Prometheus

Compatibility between OpenTelemetry and Prometheus is probably a topic large
enough for its own post. For now I will just say that for all practical
purposes, OpenTelemetry exponential histograms are 1:1 compatible with
Prometheus native histograms. Scale calculations, bucket boundaries, error
rates, zero buckets, etc are all the same. For more information, I recommend you
watch this talk given by Ruslan Vovalov and Ganesh Vernekar: [Using
OpenTelemetry’s Exponential Histograms in Prometheus][]

_A version of this article was [originally posted][] to the author's blog._

> [originally posted]: {{% param canonical_url %}}
> 
> [Why Histograms?]: {{% relref "why-histograms" %}}
> 
> [Histograms vs Summaries]: {{% relref "histograms-vs-summaries" %}}
> 
> [Using OpenTelemetry’s Exponential Histograms in Prometheus]:
>   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2_TpDcess8

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Why Histograms?]: ../why-histograms/
[Histograms vs Summaries]: ../histograms-vs-summaries/
[Using OpenTelemetry’s Exponential Histograms in Prometheus]:
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2_TpDcess8

[originally posted]: {{% param canonical_url %}}
```

Author: When I did this before the formatter got mad. It tries to combine all 3 link definition lines into a single paragraph which breaks the markdown

Author: This is what `npm run format` does to the markdown in your suggestion:

```
[Why Histograms?]: {{% relref "why-histograms" %}} [Histograms vs Summaries]:
{{% relref "histograms-vs-summaries" %}} [Using OpenTelemetry’s Exponential
Histograms in Prometheus]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2_TpDcess8

[originally posted]: {{% param canonical_url %}}
```

Author: Found a way to make it nicer using prettier ignore directives
